# UNWORLDING - IN DIALOGUE WITH ELIADE AND HEIDEGGER

As if on cue, shortly after I published my last article, Elon Musk
himself demonstrated my point in a near-cartoonish manner. Advertising
billboards in space. You couldn’t make it up if you tried. It sounds
like the absurd scheme of a ghoulish tycoon in a sci-fi spoof, but no -
this is our real world now. These are truly the exploits of a puny bug
of a man. I’m reminded of a choice Nietzsche quote:

	“The earth has become small, and on it hops the last man, who makes
	 everything small. His race is as ineradicable as the flea; the last
	 man lives longest.”

The guy’s name alone ought to be enough to sink him in the public eye,
but no - indeed, this odious snake-oil “visionary” has amassed a
sycophantic cult of reddit-dwelling neo-nerds. It is fitting indeed
that today’s most rampant technophiles are adult children, inseparable
from their mounds of toys, hoarding pop culture and gadgets like a
sweaty dragon in his mum’s dungeon’s basement.

Last time’s topic was on the irreconcilability of traditional modes of
life with technology and by extension how the encroachment of
technology can eradicate the sense of place that may exist in a given
area. This is as true for the sky as it is for land - what was once the
great untouchable heaven, the very core of the supernatural, is now
just more ad space. It’s almost poetic in its total annihilation of
what poetry there is left in the world. The notion of the world as
brimming with poetry is central to the work of the later Heidegger, who
drew greatly on the works of German Romantic Poet Friedrich Hölderlin.
This topic deserves its own post altogether, but for now, I’ll let my
favourite Heidegger scholar, Richard Capobianco, make my point for me.
As we are dealing with Heidegger, I’m afraid dense terminology is
unavoidable. Heidegger’s term Ereignis, which means something
like “coming into view”, relates to the way in which things present
themselves to us in the world. An authentic encounter with Being is
made impossible by the intrusions of technologisation into precisely
this process of “revealing” that Heidegger describes. It’s not just me
making the explicit link to tech - Heidegger was himself deeply
concerned with the question of technology - so concerned, in fact, that
he wrote an essay named The Question Concerning Technology concerning
the question; such was his level of concern with technology. Jokes
aside, here’s Capobianco on Ereignis:

“For Heidegger, though, what we encounter, what “there is” (es gibt),
 has the character of an “Ereignis,” a “happening” or “event” within
 lived experience (here he employs his signature term Ereignis for one
 of the first times). In other words, things “happen” to us and address
 us; they are “events” of showing that we appropriate in language. As
 he put it, “es weltet” – that is, the surrounding world “worlds”;
 things “world” “everywhere and always.” I suggest that with this
 expression “es weltet,” Heidegger was tapping into the meaning of the
 old verb form welten, “to world,” which, even more evidently in
 English, once conveyed “to furnish and fill up” and also “to come into
 existence.” In other words, “things” emerge and abound about us in
 their eventfulness. The key point is that in his reflections here, we
 detect that Heidegger, very early on, was animated and guided by an
 exceptionally vivid sense of how things are manifest to us in
 an “eventful” way, how they address us and even “speak” to us, as it
 were … what truly interested and moved Heidegger was not so much that
 things are made-present by us (Husserl) as that things present
 themselves to us.”

I would have to make this point far more subtly had Mr. Musk not given
me such a perfect, near-parody illustration of it. The sky is not
exactly able to “present itself” to us if its blotted out with literal
fucking advertising. Could there be a more perfect encapsulation of
everything wrong with our modern thinking? The sky itself has become
standing reserve. The world “spoke” to us in ages past. Our world has
gone quiet. When things exist and occur in their “Ereignis”, their
eventfulness, as a part of the process of “worlding”, the cosmos
appears to us as a living thing, and things “reveal” themselves to us.
We partake in a greater process that brims with meaning and
significance. 

Having intentionally eschewed the use of his insights in the last
article, I am now bursting to discuss Mircea Eliade, often considered
an “historian of religion”; I think this a reductive assessment of his
works, and prefer to call him a philosopher. Eliade’s masterpiece, The
Sacred and the Profane, is centred around the notion that traditional,
that is religious man, delineates time and space into that which is
sacred and that which is profane. The world is therefore structured
around qualitative distinctions, places are experienced as sacred or
profane in kind, and the world is imbued with meaning, based on the
observance of these distinctions. As we witnessed last time, the
approach of modern man to space is quite the opposite. In our
rationalised, clockwork model of the universe, all space is
fundamentally interchangeable - there is no inherent difference between
a church and a shopping centre, only that one “lot” happens to house a
stone building with a steeple and the other several acres of identicate
metal oblongs. The world, and the cosmos at large has been
desacralised. There is, fundamentally, no difference between
advertising in orbit, and what we’ve already done; for instance,
encasing the earth in a concrete net of roads. The technological
retiarius ensnares the two in the same way, and throttles their
discrete modes of being. It is not the organisation of the world that
is at fault here, but rather that the world is organised according to
no higher principle whatsoever, only along the arbitrary lines of the
all-consuming machine. This is the kind of world that offers you
American style suburbs in an Arabian desert. We can intuit that these
places were conceived and constructed in absolute isolation from the
ecological context they were placed in, by men entirely insulated from
the living world. What possible meaning can be derived from such
atrocities of arbitrariness?


As seen last time, our machinations are able to utterly transform the
sense of a place, but this is done with the sheerly arbitrary motive
of “line go up”; some fetishistic attachment to the  extension of the
system. This is the vice of men like Musk (who himself is ultimately of
little consequence, but makes a good punching bag), for which the world
must suffer. We so flippantly obliterate worlds because we
fundamentally lack a notion of the world as sacred. If the entire
planet is desacralised then there can be no sacred space as opposed to
profane space. All the world becomes one monotonous and profane zone,
adrift at a random point in an empty cosmos. Our delineations of space
are made according to material assessments and quantitative summaries
of a place, and when reality is structured in this way, the various
uses and features of space become utterly meaningless. I once again
cite the example of the road; the road may carve a valley in half, and
permanently transform the lived reality of that valley. The ancients
too transformed areas in drastic ways, and altered the experience of
the world, but their actions were done in the understanding of space as
something non-homogeneous, knowing and intending their creations to
reflect the religious meaning that they intuited in the world. The
road, however, obliterates and transforms according to… well, nothing.
At best it does so according to some notion of efficiency, but its
treatment of space is ultimately entirely arbitrary. The valley becomes
something else, but according to absolutely no qualitative notion or
vision, what results is purely a disruption, without meaning. What
allows us to do this so flippantly is our pre existing notion of the
world as desacralised. When we actively “profane” the world, we are
merely treating it as we are already convinced that it is. Contorting
it to fit the model in our head. What difference does our destruction
make if all places are fundamentally the same? We are left entirely
unmoved, or even repulsed by the most technically impressive
architectural feats of all time, when ancient man felt the real
presence of the gods in a simple grove of trees. This is because the
herculean means employed to erect our skyscrapers and to beam messages
from satellites are all done according to a principle of absolutely
nothing. Nothing but a gluttonous black hole, growing through the
consumption of endless matter.

Ancient religion is something that arises organically, and stratifies
the world into sacred and profane space in a way which reflects
the “world” of its adherents (this is where Heidegger and Eliade
align). In delineating that which is “sacred”, homo religiosus
organises reality concentrically around his specific place in the
universe, or his “holy land”. In the Mappa Mundi, mediæval man places
Jerusalem at the very centre of the world; the sacred pillar around
which all other space is measured. As such, the world is imbued with
meaning based around its relation to this centre. Eliade notes how the
ethnonym of numerous groups of people stems etymologically from their
word for “the people”. It is this tendency which colours his conception
of religion; religion “founds the world” around a specific place.
Eliade notes that:

“Religious man’s desire to live in the sacred is in fact equivalent with
 his desire to take up his abode in objective reality, not to let
 himself be paralysed by the never-ceasing relativity of purely
 subjective experiences, to live in a real and effective world, and not
 in an illusion.”

The world which has no distinction between sacred and profane space is a
chaotic world of absolute subjectivity. If the sun is just “a ball of
gas and plasma seven squidgillion kilomofarts away”, then its meaning
is entirely up to whoever perceives it, and likewise if the sky is just
an empty canvas to project Uber Eats logos onto, then what objective
truth can we possibly hope to discern from it? Reality is structured in
a given way. The sky is above you, the earth below and you need to eat
to live. These absolutes, these limitations are what gives meaning to
life. When space is viewed as quantitatively equivalent, the room for
sacred truths evaporates. There’s a kind of paradox to all this, that
when man “organises” the world in straight lines, and seems to make
things so tidy, things become more chaotic than ever before. All space
today is treated as equivalent, and what once gave structure and
meaning to life has been abolished. We are left observing this planet
as a disembodied subject, to whom the world reveals nothing.
Heidegger’s world has been unworlded; when encountering a thing or a
place, we do not experience the “event” of disclosure
(Ereignis), because we know, or think we know, the object in its
entirety. Welten, as discussed by Capobianco earlier, is crucially a
verb. This concept of experience holds that authentic being in the
world is an activity, a process. Our more modern view of things would
describe the world as a set of rigid nouns - Greek and Latin derived
nouns, the sterile stuff of catalogues and research papers; not earthy,
autochthonous Germanic words like world itself, much less as an
organic, living process of being (another Germanic word - note the
difference in quality between it and its Latinate counterpart,
existence (once again - fodder for another post)).

Our obsessive “ordering” of the world, and attempt to shine a light
through every surface to reveal its “true” nature has left us blind to
the living reality of worlding. I’m reminded of C.S. Lewis’s
allegorical novel The Pilgrim’s Regress (a play on John Bunyan’s the
Pilgrim’s Progress). In the novel, the protagonist, John, is captured
by a giant named the Spirit of the Age. The spirit’s gaze turns
everything transparent, and when he looks at John, his entrails and
insides are revealed to everyone, including himself, and he is
convinced that this base material is “all he is”; his true nature. Our
ideology would have us believe that this is so - that we are nothing
but a collection of profane guts and biomass, and that the world is
itself just minerals and vegetation, but John realises the falsity of
the giant. His jailor says:

“Our relations with the cow are not delicate–as you can easily see if
 you imagine eating any of her other secretions.”

At which point John realises that the spirit and his cult of despair are
all talking bollocks:

“You are trying to pretend that unlike things are like. You are trying
 to make us think that milk is the same sort of thing as sweat or
 dung.’

“And pray, what difference is there except by custom?”

“Are you a liar or only a fool, that you see no difference between that
 which Nature casts out as refuse and that which she stores up as
 food?”

“So Nature is a person, then, with purposes and consciousness,” said the
 jailor with a sneer. “In fact, a Landlady (play on Mother Nature. In
 the book, God is named the Landlord). No doubt it comforts you to
 imagine you can believe that sort of thing”; and he turned to leave
 the prison with his nose in the air.

“I know nothing about that,” shouted John after him. “I am talking of
 what happens. Milk does feed calves and dung does not.”

John realises that there are fundamental qualitative differences between
things, and that it is fallacious to reduce everything to equivalent
materiality. The giant can pretend that through making things
transparent he is “revealing their true properties”, but in fact, he
and his followers are merely prescribing themselves a delusion. They,
and the scientistic mindset along with them, are imposing an external
model onto reality, and missing the lived “world”, as Heidegger saw it.
Things cannot “reveal themselves to us”, for as long as we persist with
a mindset that wishes to unclothe reality and collapse it to its dirt
and fluids. John, away from his atheistic age, starts to experience the
objective world that is founded on the given, on the reality that dung
and milk are different things. Likewise, homo religiosus understands
that there are “dung places” and “milk places”. Sacred ground is unlike
profane ground, just as the earth is unlike the sky. Man can perceive
from his objective conditions that there is a structure and an ordered
meaning to the cosmos, it is only when he is cut off from his natural
proximity to the conditions and limitations of existence that he starts
to view the world in the fallen way that we do today.

Have you ever even seen the Milky Way? I haven’t. We are unable to live
the authentic encounter of man with the heavens, because our lights
have blotted out the stars. In our “enlightenment” (pun intended) we
have become blind. That wild and untamed world of myriad and particular
forms, the plethora of Being, of worlds that once existed, has subsided
to a sterile, levelled plain, where everywhere can be anywhere, and no
one knows, or has any way of knowing where they are. The sad irony of
today is that we derive chaos out of “order”, where we once enjoyed
order out of a kind of beautiful chaos.

Eliade offers fascinating insights into this as well. It’s commonplace
at this point to speak of modernity as Kaliyuga, the dark age of vice
and sin, and in general, eschatological accounts of radical decline are
very popular ways to characterise our current world, among antimoderns.
These are found also in primordial religions. There is a notion common
to homo religiosus that the gods are the forces of order, in opposition
against those of chaos, and that the end of the world is the triumph of
chaos over order, bringing about total destruction. Of course, the
golden age, Satyayuga comes after the purification of the world in
absolute destruction. In the Hindu case, this is performed by Kalki,
tenth avatar of Vishnu, and in the ancient Mesopotamian account, the
god Marduk slew Tiamat the serpent, embodiment of chaos and the
encircling waters of the world (note the similarities to Jǫrmungandr),
who destroys the world at the end of time.

“On the last day of the year the universe was dissolved in the
 primordial waters. The marine monster Tiamat - symbol of darkness, of
 the formless, the non-manifested - revived and once again threatened.
 The world that had existed for a whole year really disappeared. Since
 Tiamat was again present, the cosmos was annulled; and Marduk was
 obliged to create it once again, after having once again conquered
 Tiamat.”

It is not incidental that the destruction of the world is envisioned as
an embodiment of chaos, of water, that erodes and dissolves. As the
sacred has fled our world we are left with a chaotic assembly of
resources and goods and plots of land. In endeavouring to understand we
have left ourselves more confused and lost than men have ever been. The
world has been undone. 

Tiamat is the chaotic, the unmanifested, the formless. As we have fled
further from an organic life, in touch with truth and nature, the
formative pressures that once acted upon us have relented. We are now
able to perform radically arbitrary actions, in a way unknown to our
ancestors - what results is the formless, the unmanifested, the false
and the untrue: Tiamat. But there is ultimate hope - in Marduk, in
Kalki, in the forces of order. The fact is; an artificial lifestyle
sustained on obscene levels of abundance is ecologically impossible. We
are through the looking glass, in a momentary lapse of limitation, but
those limitations are nature itself. Another blog post, or even a book,
is needed to discuss this at length. For now, I will conclude by saying
that when this age passes, when man (provided he survives…) is once
again viscerally in contact with the realities of nature, when the
world is once again free to “world”, then he will finally be able to
perceive the light of heaven once again, and live in that sense of awe
and wonder that was once inherent to life in this world.

