# An Introduction to Power in the Modern State

Power in Medieval Europe existed in a delicate balancing act between the
**Crown, the Church, the Nobility, and the Merchant class. **

These institutions, holding power within a regime, can be accurately
described as constituting the Government. A good King knew that if he
wanted to retain power, he needed to ensure that he was not replaced as
king, first and foremost. While the Crown itself retains power, kings
can be replaced.

A good king must, however, also to ensure that the Crown’s power (and
hence his own) is not siphoned off by other institutions. The
institutions themselves and their powers are broadly summarised below:

#### The Crown: The executive power in the state.

Controls the military and creates law. Delegates power to the Nobility
for maintenance of local order.-The Church: Determines social values and
act as a source of truth for the people. Exerts power by influencing
social norms and expectations, setting the boundaries of acceptable
thought, and condemning heretics.-The Nobility: Delegated either local
fiefdoms or specific powers by the Crown to administer the law and
day-to-day running of affairs. Responsible to the Crown.-The Merchants:
Have power by virtue of their material wealth. Do not have direct
responsibility for anything unless compelled to by the Crown.

There are some assumptions made in this model, which we will address
briefly. Power exists in a closed system. While the overall power of the
system can rise or fall depending on regime strength, it can never leak
out into another, unseen institution. So, whatever power exists in a
regime can only shift between institutions. The institutions themselves,
or at least their functions and loose groupings, persist and cannot be
created or destroyed so long as the underlying civilisationexists.

At this point, a skeptic may rightly ask: “But what about the people?
Surely they have power?”. The answer is no. The people do not have any
direct power under this model. If you disagree, I suggest you brush up
on your history of peasant rebellions. The word “Jacquerie”, and the
derisive, contemptuous connotation it has exist for good reasons.

That said, “the people” are still significant in this model, but only as
a weapon for one of the institutions to wield. While powerless when
acting alone,they act as a weapon for whoever can effectively command
them. If it feels like you are reading a short summary of elite theory
of power; yes, you are. It describes Medieval European systems of
government accurately, and we will also find that it describes our own
situation equally well.

The military is also relevant to any discussion surrounding power. It is
defined here as the physical power by which the law is enforced. In this
model, there is no separation between the military and the Crown.
Whoever commands the military commands the physical power of the state,
and hence the absolute power which, by definition, belongs to the Crown.
Think of Japan under the Shogunate –yes, the Emperor was still the
Emperor in name, but the Shogun ruled by strength ofarms.

Now that we have our 4-institution working model for power interactions
in Medieval Europe, let us consider the possibility that these
institutions and arrangement of power in society did not just persist
until the upheaval of the French Revolution, but in fact persisted
until.... today. Keep an open mind, and we will see that institutions
embedded in Medieval life continue to shape our reality of today.

It’s likely that you will be wondering: “if the institutions persist,
where is the Church?”. And indeed, the Catholic church (or Protestant,
or Orthodox, for that matter) simply does not exist as a power centre
today. However, the need for our regime to determine a consensus through
social values, set bounds of acceptable opinion, and determine a source
of truth remains. We no longer have the Pope in Rome telling us what to
think and believe; yet we shall find that our Vatican still exists. Our
Church has not been eliminated –far from it –it has become
decentralised. You must ask yourself: who, or what is responsible for
these functions today?

We will break the Church’s main functions down into three tasks:
creation of truth, propagation of that truth to society at large, and
suppression of alternate viewpoints. Who creates truth in society? Who
are our oracles? Begin with what constitutes “proof” today. Consider the
knee-jerk reaction of a midwit losing an argument: “Do you have a source
for that?”.

    Yes, dear reader, our priests wear white lab coats and conduct elaborate rituals with petri dishes and computer modelling programs. Sometimes they even make animal sacrifices –all humanely and ethically, of course. If my experience in research holds true, most are even virgins, just like our Medieval priests.

If you come armed with a list of “credible sources” to support your
claims, you can make anything true. If you scoff at this and counter
that our priestly caste today offers a more serious and accurate
description of the world than their Christian predecessors, I invite you
to take a deeper look into the replication crisis. Continue to look, and
you will see that the Church declares certain perspectives “true” while
suppressing others in a fashion which has little to do with fact.

Recently, the New England Journal of Medicine, perhaps the most
prestigious medical journal in the world, declared that “sex
designations on birth certificates offer no clinical utility”. Such a
position could, of course, only be held by the most influential journal
in the world –if anyone else tried this, they would be laughed out into
the street. But none may dare question the doctrine of the New England
Journal of Medicine.

The announcement from the New England Journal of Medicine had to arrive
in front of me somehow. I certainly did not go looking for it by myself.
So, who propagates these stories to be read and absorbed by the masses?
Who is it that gatekeeps the information which makes it through to
society at large? Our curators of respectable thought, the mouthpieces
of the regime, are known as journalists. They command an indirect power
which is no less strong, influencing the (un)written law, its
interpretation, and its enforcement.

Yes, you or I can go on obscure forums and try to determine fact from
schizophrenic outburst, but this knowledge has no credibility –it cannot
be easily shared with others. Stories promoted by a blue-check
journalist come hard-wired with respectability. If I were to dispute a
story published in one of our august newspapers (and I would never, for
they always report fact), I must provide the burden of proof. Once in
black and white, a story becomes real in a way that bears no relation to
the reality and can be cited as “proof” for decades to come. It may even
become a primary source for historians covering our time in the future
–and that should make you think about how true history really is.

Journalists launder truth which has been manufactured by our priests in
the universities. Of course, their power extends far beyond this –they
can manufacture their own truth by selective amplification of stories
and events. Everything you watch, read, and listen to in mainstream
media has been curated by journalists. What they choose to tell you is
just as (and often more) important than what they choose to hide from
you. Through this power, the Church creates a narrative which directly
influences public opinion and manufactures consent for the ruling
regime. Putting it plainly, the media quite literally shapes reality for
your average person. That is power.

Knowledge which existed outside this system could reach average people
at scale, if only for a short time. Social media, particularly Youtube
and Twitter, were a platform by which someone outside of the system
could have an audience based purely on the quality of the content they
produced. As social media grew in influence and began to siphon legacy
media’s monopoly over information it was quickly subsumed into the
Church. Now it is one of its most powerful arms, able to not only set
the standards of discourse, but to deplatform and remove people and
ideas which contradict their dogma from the conversation. When people
are completely unable to access outsiders who contradict our
tastemakers, will they be able to think dissident thoughts at all?

Indeed, the Church’s control over information is so complete that it was
able to cut off a sitting President’s communications channels without
consequence. Whether you agree with the reasoning behind the decision or
not, the fact that a few dozen (at most) employees within a private
company have this ability suggests that they wield enormous power –the
first thing targeted in coup attempts is a leader’s capacity to
communicate and hence organise. In the event of civil disturbances or
uprisings, the sovereign is dependent on the goodwill or neutrality of
tech and media oligarchs. This undoubtedly places a leader in a bind –to
be on the wrong side of the media andtech oligarchs is to put yourself
at their mercy. I ask the reader: is this a healthy development? Can
democratic society survive control of information being put in the hands
of so few people, who are both unaccountable and unelected?

Having established our Church, we come to our Nobility. We are certainly
not answerable to a local lord with hereditary title anymore. However,
our definition of Nobility is a functional definition; in today’s world,
management of daily affairs falls to the bureaucracy. All the state
apparatus and justice system falls under this umbrella.

Modern-day fiefdoms can be geographical in nature, but today are most
related to specialisation in tasks of government. In some cases, there
is significant overlap between bureaucratic institutions as they vie for
increasing power and influence –does anybody know where the jurisdiction
of the NSA, FBI, CIA, and Department of State begin and end in practical
terms?

Politicians who are given the Public Health portfolio, for example, are
hardly content matter experts. They are routinely manipulated by their
far more knowledgeable senior bureaucrats –bureaucrats who have
permanent, highly paid employment in the Department in contrast to the
tenuous term limit of their supposedly superior politician, who is
generally paid much less. In times of strife, the politician –who knows
they are way out of their depth –defers to the bureaucrat at every time,
simply becoming a rubber stamp. And should something go wrong, the
politician takes the fall, while the bureaucrat remains unaccountable;
either remaining in their position or shuffled sideways out of the
spotlight.

Because of this, we can see how our bureaucratic Noblemen can build up
from a petty fiefdom into actually threatening the authority of the king
himself. This dynamic remains with us today. Public health bureaucrats
have essentially had limitless authority over economic and social life
in Western countries during the duration of the coronavirus pandemic.
This influence can also extend to more cynical, political ends:
bureaucrats involved in the security state apparatus were able to stymie
the executive in the US by lying about things like troop movement in
Syria and concocting elaborate conspiracies involving Russia. This is
the executive from whom they supposedly take their orders and are
subordinate to.

Lastly, we come to our Merchant class. The special case. They derive
their power by using their wealth to influence others within the other
institutions. As a parasite class, the Merchants have no direct
responsibility to the State, and their influence is related to the power
that the State itself can exert. In dysfunctional nations, power is
cheap to buy –because that power is limited. In more efficient states,
power is more expensive as the Government has far more capacity to exert
its will.

We also find that our merchant class becomes more powerful as the Crown
(specifically, the executive) becomes less powerful. Absolute autocrats
have no use for money. However, regime apparatchiks holding a sliver of
power (say, a politician or bureaucrat) are by comparison far more
vulnerable to temptation. The soft, indirect, but highly corrupting
power of lobbyist money influences individuals holding power within the
regime to turn a blind eye to the excesses of their paymasters.
Eventually funding on all sides of politics reaches a point by which,
without powerful financial backing, it is impossible to win in a
supposedly democratic system. This can only be opposed by a strong,
powerful executive who is less vulnerable to the termite-like corrosion
of order and divide-and-conquer tactics used by the Merchant class.

Observing our institutions and how they have changed over time, there
are some clear trends that have emerged. The King’s power hasbeen
steadily eroded over time, splintered from one absolute sovereign into
legislative bodies. The Church was destroyed as a unified institution,
its power shared across multiple different groups which still operate in
a broadly organised way despite a lack of central command. The nobility
shifted from hereditary titles into university-awarded accreditations (a
power which used to belong to the Crown, now shifted to a group of
decentralised university administrators).

Interestingly, despite the executive’s power being as weak as it has
ever been, consensus from the Church is that your vote has never been
more crucial. Of course, this is the total opposite of reality: your
vote means less than it ever has before, because power increasingly
exists in the hands of institutions which are fundamentally
unaccountable and untouchable. There is a bizarre contradiction when the
institutions which tell you how important the executive is,
simultaneously act to prevent the executive from ever exercising any
real power. The real government –which does not include the executive
–does not need executive oversight at all, and indeed would prefer life
without it.

It is tough to say which institution out of the Church, the Nobility,
and the Merchants is currently the most powerful. The three exist in a
kind of anarchic triumvirate, all feeding from each other to further
accelerate their dominance of the political, financial, and even social
life. If this author is to wager a guess, it would be the Church which
dominates; by controlling the information, the Church controls the
youth. On a long enough timeline, these youth, brought up on Church
orthodoxies, will staff the other arms of the Government and subvert
them from within.

These trends broadly represent a slow erosion of the Crown’s power,
leached by representative democracy and then swallowed up by the Church
and Nobility. Today’s Crown, including all legislatures and leaders, are
largely powerless. They are accountable to the people, and therefore
temporary according to their whims, but the Nobility, Church and
Merchants are unaccountable and impossible for the people to remove.
Essentially, we now perform a charade where we elect a powerless
figurehead who manufactures consent for the real ruling regime.
